The goal of this tutorial video is to show you how to create special functions that you can implant
into PyTorch models.
In principle, you can do basically anything you want inside those functions with the internals of the
model, including transforming them, visualizing them, or changing them.
What we are going to do with these hooks for this and the next several sections, is to extract the
activations from inside the model.
This is a vital approach for anything related to interpretability, or really any kind of investigative
work into the internal workings of LMS.
So you already know how to get all the weights, the trainable parameters from anywhere in the model.
Of course, you know how to get the final output logits at the end of the model feedforward process
that's simply the output of the model when you input a sequence of tokens.
And I have previously showed you how to get the outputs of different transformer blocks using the output
hidden States option.
But so far in this course, I haven't taught you how to get the activations from inside a transformer
block.
For example, the individual activations matrices from the attention or MLP layers.
And that is what you do with hooks.
Once you learn how to create and implant hooks, you can access literally any number you want from anywhere
in the model.
Now, there isn't really any theory in this lecture, so let me just tell you what we're going to do.
In the code demo.
I will show you how to implant hooks into the model to extract the Q matrix activation.
Now, there isn't anything particularly unique or special about the Q activations here.
You can do this with any other activations anywhere in the model.
I'm just using the Q activations from a particular layer as an example.
Anyway, here you see what a hook function looks like.
I'll explain what all of these variables mean in the Python demo, but basically the idea is that I
am extracting the activations matrix and then getting the first third of that matrix of the dimensions,
and that corresponds to just the activations.
You will remember from when I introduced you to the attention mechanism that the activations are tokens
by embedding dimensions.
So here I store that in a dictionary.
And down here I use some methods on the model to implant this hook function.
So after creating and implanting a couple of hooks in the Python demo, we can then check out the activations.
For example, here you see some uh, q matrix activations.
This one is of size one by six by 768.
That corresponds to one sequence, or one batch that is six tokens long.
And of course there are 768 embeddings dimensions in GPT two small.
So here you see what those activations actually look like.
And you can see that I implanted two hooks, one in layer five and one in layer seven.
Once we have these data, we can start exploring them.
In this video I'll keep it pretty simple.
We'll just create a scatter plot just so you can see what it looks like to work with hooked data.
So this is the activations for two separate tokens across all of the Q matrix neurons.
There are a few other important things to know about hooks, like whether the data get replaced or concatenated
each time you run a new forward pass in the model, and also how to remove hooks that you've already
implanted.
It turns out that hooks can lead to a bit of a performance decrease, depending on how much code happens
inside the hook.
So in general, you really only want to have hooks in the model when you actually need them.
Well, I'm sure you're excited to learn all about accessing all of the model's internals, so let's
now switch to Python.
Here I am importing the GPT two model and switching it into eval mode.
And I just put this in a separate cell.
So we can also see this architecture description.
We will be referring back to this A few other times in this, uh, in this code demo, and I'm also
showing you the config file for this model.
We will also use some of these variables here, but it's also just another reminder of all of the useful
meta information about a model that you can get from model config.
For example, model config and context.
This tells you how many token the maximum token capacity.
This corresponds to the number of attention heads.
And here we have the number of layers, the number of transformers, and so on.
Okay, so now what I'm going to do is before actually introducing you to hooks, I want to show you
what's a different way that you can access some of the internals from the model.
Now you already know that you can use code that looks like this to extract the weights of a particular
piece of the model.
So let's say we want to get the weights for this here.
So for the q, k, v weights matrices in the attention block from some particular transformer block.
Well you already know how we can access those weights.
And that's by writing model.
Whatever is the variable for the model that h.
These are all the transformer blocks H is for hidden three would give us the fourth transformer block
because we start counting at zero.
And then we have the attention sub block and then C attention.
And now what I'm doing here is just making up some random input and pushing it through all of these
weights.
And then I'm getting out the first third of those.
And that corresponds to the Q activation.
Okay.
So uh, yeah.
So here I get this variable embed dimension from Modelconfig.
This of course is going to be 768.
So this random embeddings matrix is one by 20.
That's as if we have 20 tokens that we push through the model.
So a sequence of 20 tokens and there's only one sequence.
So it's a batch size of one.
So these would be the activations that have passed through the token and position embeddings.
The first two uh transformer blocks.
And now we have this transformer block push those data through here.
And then yeah we get the output and we can isolate the activations which are 20 by 768.
Uh, and again yeah, that's 20 tokens and 768 dimensions in the Q matrix.
Now the thing is, you know, this is for, uh, just the activations here that I came up with randomly,
if you actually want to trace real activations coming from real text, that really gets tokenized and
you just want to get the activations from this Q matrix from this hidden layer.
What you would need to do is basically code that looks like this.
But you'd have to repeat that for the attention and the MLP for the first transformer and the second
transformer.
And of course you'd have to do all the embeddings like this.
That would be a lot of code just to get this from one actual forward pass.
Not with using random data, but with using real tokens.
So yeah, I just want to show you this because this is totally, utterly pointless.
You do not want to really get data from the model using a string of lines of code to do an entire forward
pass like this.
It's just too much to keep track of.
So that is the motivation for implanting a hook into the model.
Here I'm showing two websites.
This is Pytorch's explanation about these hooks and this Stack Overflow post I just found to be a pretty
nice exchange that explains how the hooks work in PyTorch.
So this is for further reading if you are interested.
Okay, so now I'm going to define a hook.
So a hook is a function that we implant into the model.
So I will talk about this outer function in a moment.
But it's basically just a way to allow us to specify a variable inside this hook where we can specify
the layer that.
So we can soft code the layer that we want to implant this hook into.
So here's the main function.
So you have this hook function.
You have three inputs here module input and output.
The module is the name of the layer that the hook is attached to.
And that would correspond to if I scroll up here.
So all of this.
So this piece of text here would be B module.
And then we have the input which is the inputs into that layer during the forward pass.
And the outputs are the outputs from that layer.
Okay.
So then what I do here is I say so I push the input through C attention.
So that's the beginning.
That's where we calculate the q, k and v activations based on the unique inputs that are coming in
from the tokens.
Uh, the input into the model, multiplying the wq, the w k and the w v matrices.
And you will remember from earlier in this course when I introduced the attention algorithm that uh,
in open AI format, these are stored as a three times embeddings dimension matrix where it's the Q matrix,
and then the k matrix and then the V matrix.
Okay.
So here I get the qkv activations.
Here.
I'm extracting the activations only from the first 768 dimensions of this third chunk of this tensor
here.
And so this gives me the activations.
All right.
And then I am just storing it into this dictionary here.
So this is a dictionary that I initialized up here.
You can see it's a dictionary because it has curly brackets.
And then here yeah the key of this dictionary is attention.
And then the layer num and then Q and then I set that to be equal to this value over here.
Here's just a note where I'm explaining that we are not taking the output of the entire layer.
If you want the output of the entire C attention layer, that would correspond to scroll back up here
the output of this.
So right before we multiply by the projection the w0 Zero matrix.
If you wanted the entire output of all of this attention mechanism here, that would actually be this
variable output here.
And if that's all you want, then that's fine.
And you could do you could run a line of code that looks like this.
In fact, you can leave this uncommented if you like, because there's not going to be any name conflicts
over here.
So this will get the just the queue activations and this gets the output of this layer.
Okay.
And that is the end of this hook function.
Now you do not always need to have an outer function here called implant hook.
This is convenient if you want to be able to soft code which layer of the model you want to put this
into, and that you can see I do down here.
So I define these two layers.
So I'm going to implant two hooks into layer five.
So transformer block five transformer block index seven.
So it's actually the sixth and the eighth, uh, transformer block.
And here is the key line of code where I'm implanting it.
So model dot h.
This is where I want to implant it.
Dot register forward hook.
This is a special method that comes with PyTorch models.
So register forward hook.
And then I call the name of the function that I want to use.
So in this case I'm calling that outer function and inputting the name of the layer.
And that outer function is just a really simple wrapper.
It does nothing.
It just allows me to have this layer number soft coded.
Okay.
So uh here I have the output of this method register forward hook is I'm calling this handles.
These are just pointers to those functions.
In the model.
You do not actually need those.
You can just write the code like this.
That is completely fine.
Uh if you would want to have handles, so you would want to have the output of this register forward
hook function if you want to remove that hook later on, which is sometimes a good idea, sometimes
not necessary.
Here, I'm doing it just to show you how it works.
Okay, so we can run that here.
I'm using this function here or this method forward hooks.
This just shows me all the hooks that I have implanted in here.
This is basically just confirmation that this code actually worked.
So now we have the hooks implanted.
And how do we actually use them?
How can we get data out of those hooks?
So here, uh, I am coming up with some text.
I think I was not feeling particularly creative when I wrote this code cell, but anyway, now I'm tokenizing
the text and passing it into the model to get the outputs.
So maybe the hooked activations.
Remember this is called activations.
I have this dictionary activations.
Maybe those activations are attached to the output of the model.
Well you can already see that it's not going to be in here.
So here I'm just showing all of the attributes that are associated with this output object.
And activations does not appear anywhere in there.
But they are in that dictionary.
They're just in the main Python workspace.
So here we see a dictionary.
It contains several keys including attention five Q attention output five, and attention seven q and
yeah, and so on.
So these are the hooks that I have implanted.
So then we can basically just check the size of these.
So this one particular activations from transformer block five and the Q activations the size of that
is one by six by 768 corresponding to one batch, one sequence, six tokens, and of course 768 dimensions
or elements in the Q matrix.
Okay.
So what I want to show you now is that the way that I have coded the hook means that the hooked data
are replaced every time you run a forward pass.
And you can kind of already see that that's going to be the case when you look at this code here.
So every time this hook goes, it's not appending, it's not creating some new element in this dictionary.
Instead it's literally just replacing.
So as long as this name stays the same, which of course it is because the hook is already in there
for this layer number.
Then each time we do a forward pass through the model, this these data will get overwritten with whatever
was the most recent forward pass.
Okay, so that makes sense when looking at the code.
But it's one thing for, you know, for you to think that code works a certain way just by looking at
it.
And it's always nice to have some real confirmation.
Okay.
And that's what I do here.
So here I am printing out the activations from the previous run.
In fact, it might be easier if I do it like this.
Okay.
So this is the activations for the code that we already ran.
And this is another this is a different sentence.
And then I'm pushing those tokens through the model.
And then I'm outputting exactly the same layer.
So all the same Q activations.
And let's see what they look like.
So here we see yeah this is the first run and the second feedforward sweep with different tokens.
So these are the same.
These tokens are the same as these tokens.
And now these tokens.
This row is different from this row.
So why is that the case?
I said that they get replaced entirely.
We looked at the code.
It certainly seems like the activations are being overwritten.
And yet here the first two rows seem to be identical to these two rows here.
Is there something wrong?
Can you figure out what's going on?
So what's going on here is that let's have a look at what are the tokens that I actually pass through.
So the first time I ran a forward pass it was this is an example sentence.
And then the second time I ran a forward pass it is this is a different sentence.
So the first two tokens are actually identical in the first time.
And the second run here.
So of course the first two rows will be the same.
At least you know at this level of precision.
And then here is where the tokens are different.
So of course the processing in the Q matrix is different Anyway, the important point here is that the
way that I have written the hook function, once you run through a forward pass, once when you run
through another forward pass, you push more tokens through the model.
The previous data are completely lost.
They are overwritten.
We cannot go back and access the first run of tokens.
That's not necessarily a bad thing, but just something to keep in mind.
In a moment I will show you how to change the hook definition if you really want to save all of the
previous activations.
But first, for the moment I want to just do some visualizations.
So here this is what I showed in the slides.
So this is the activation to the token different.
And this is the activation to the token A.
And yeah this is from the activation of the different uh Q elements in layer five.
I'm not going to make any interpretations about this I just to show you that it's really easy to work
with these data, to visualize them, to process them, to do some mechanistic interpretability analysis
on them once you have extracted the data from the hook.
And here I'm also just showing some more results.
These are correlation coefficients across all of the tokens from the cube matrix.
Pretty interesting to see that the first token is basically mostly uncorrelated with all of the other
tokens.
You can see this color corresponds to somewhere around zero.
It's not exactly zero, but it's going to be at least pretty small, certainly relative to the intercorrelations
across the other pairs of tokens in this sequence.
And that is not really surprising.
Remember that when the model sees the first token in a sequence, it just doesn't really know what to
make of it.
There's no context.
There's no preceding context.
Text.
The model just has exactly one token to use, and it's trying to predict the next token with no context
whatsoever.
So that's just an impossible task.
So by the time you get to the second token now, the model can start leveraging its world knowledge
and the context from previous tokens to start making some, generating some predictions and looking
at some interactions across the different tokens.
Okay, now I want to show you how to remove hooks that you have implanted.
It's very easy.
If you have an output of the hook function, then you can just do you can use the dot remove method
and that removes the hook.
Now keep in mind this is not actually deleting the variable activations.
That's a dictionary.
It just exists in the Python workspace independent of the model itself.
So when you remove a hook you're not removing the activations data, you are just removing the function
that extracts the activations from the model and puts it into a dictionary.
And to demonstrate that what I'm going to do is print out the hooks and then remove one of the hooks,
but not the other one, and then push new tokens through the model and then print out the activations
again.
And what we see here is that the hook that I removed was the second hook.
So this line and this line are identical.
And why are they identical?
Because I removed the hook.
So, uh, the model is no longer extracting those activation values and storing them into the this particular
key in the activations dictionary.
On the other hand, we have the other hook that was handle zero.
The other hook I did not remove I remove it here, but I did not remove it in this code here, so therefore
it still is hooked.
That hook remains in the model, and therefore these values will change when I give different text into
the model.
Okay, so let's remove that other one.
And now here I'm going to set up the hook slightly differently than how I did before.
It's also going to be shorter because I'm not really doing a lot of processing.
I'm literally just taking the output from the model, from this particular layer and then storing that
into this variable activations.
Now previously above I defined this variable activations to be a dictionary.
Here I'm defining it to be a list.
And why am I defining it to be a list here?
The reason is that here I want to concatenate all of the activations so they continue to be stored instead
of overwriting them each time I rerun the code.
Okay, so let me run that code here.
And now I can run through the model.
I'm just passing some text in.
I like chocolate tokenizing it and then pushing it through the model.
Notice here I don't even have something like, uh, outputs equals because I literally don't care about
the outputs here.
What I care about is the, uh, just this variable over here.
So, uh, we can see that is now a list.
It's not a dictionary, it's just a list.
And it contains the activations from the MLP projection that where I implanted this hook into.
Okay.
And then this is just more confirmation.
So this variable is a list.
It's no longer a dictionary.
I deleted the dictionary.
I overwrote it with the same variable name.
It has one element in that list.
And it is of size one by four by 768 and four, corresponding to four tokens.
From this, I like chocolate.
Apparently that takes up four tokens.
Okay.
And now I'm running, uh, exactly the same model, exactly the same tokenizer, etc. I'm just using
different text here and rerunning the code.
And now we see that this is still a list of course, but now it contains four elements.
This corresponds to the first time that I passed.
I like chocolate into the model.
This is the second time I passed.
This one is for this quotes from a song and then this one is four score and seven years ago.
Okay, so basically, uh, this is just a different way of setting up the hook.
If you want to preserve all of the activations from every time you do a forward pass in the model.
I hope you found this video useful.
We are going to be using hooks in not every single video, but probably most of the videos for the rest
of this course.